You know, it's actually kind of funny how we talk about the economy.
How do you mean?
Well, if you really listen to the language we use, there's this underlying assumption
that it operates almost exactly like the weather.
Oh, right. Yeah, like it's a force of nature.
Exactly. It's treated as this massive chaotic system of natural uncontrollable forces.
You check the morning news over your coffee and you see the headlines, right?
Interest rates are up. Inflation is down. The job market is cooling off.
Yeah, even cooling off, it's a thermodynamic term.
Right. And we're taught to react to those updates the exact same way we react to a forecast of a thunderstorm.
You grab an umbrella. You tighten your belt.
You just adapt.
You accept that these are just the natural laws of the free market playing out
and your only real option is to just, well, deal with it.
It's so pervasive, isn't it? That whole framing of inevitability.
We constantly hear phrases like market forces or economic gravity.
The natural rate of unemployment.
Yes, exactly.
That implies a system governed by neutral, unfeeling physics that sits entirely outside of human control.
The narrative is that nobody's really pulling the levers.
The machine just runs.
But I think a lot of people, and honestly, if you're listening to this, you might be one of them,
have had this sneaking suspicion at some point.
A suspicion that maybe it's not nature.
Yeah, this feeling that maybe the economy isn't a force of nature at all.
This suspicion that it's actually a game, but a game where the rules are completely invisible.
Invisible, but rigidly enforced.
Right. And enforced in a way that makes you feel like you were deliberately set up to lose.
Well, what if that isn't just a feeling?
What if we could actually map the literal mathematical geometry of those rules?
It's a fascinating premise.
Welcome to this deep dive.
If you're joining us today, you, the listener, need to settle in,
because we are in for an incredibly dense, fascinating, and really timely exploration today.
We definitely are.
We have a very specific mission.
We are taking a 2026 academic paper by the independent researcher Flyxion.
It's titled The Entropy of Austerity.
Such a great title.
It really is.
And our goal is to take its incredibly heavy physics and computational math
and translate it into a highly accessible, mind-bending new way to look at how the world works.
Okay, let's unpack this.
What exactly are we dealing with here?
Well, it really is a remarkable piece of synthesis.
What Flyxion has done is take the deeply historical and economic work of Clara E. Mattei.
Specifically her 2022 book, The Capital Order, right?
Yes, and her brand new 2026 release, Escape from Capitalism.
So Flyxion takes that history and feeds it into two highly complex scientific frameworks.
Which are?
The first is something called the RSVP model.
That stands for Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum.
Wow.
I know, it's a mouthful.
And the second is Sphere Pop Dynamics, which deals with the architecture of irreversible computation.
Okay, I have to admit, when I first saw those terms, you know, Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum and irreversible computation,
my immediate thought was that we were about to reverse engineer a warp drive.
It definitely sounds like it.
It sounds super intimidating, but I promise you, as we work our way through this deep dive,
you are going to see how these exact concepts explain the numbers on your paycheck,
the cost of your groceries, and the headlines on your news feed.
It maps perfectly onto reality.
It really does.
But before we jump into the deep end,
we do need to lay down a very clear objective disclaimer for everyone listening.
Yes, that's crucial.
The source material we are covering today, both Maddy's historical analysis and Flyxion's mathematical mapping of it,
it contains highly politically charged critiques.
Very pointed critiques of capitalism, of austerity measures, and class dynamics.
Right.
And here's the crucial point for you.
We are absolutely not taking a political side here.
We aren't endorsing these views, nor are we making any judgment on right-wing versus left-wing economics.
That is completely outside our job description.
Exactly.
Our goal today is strictly to explore the intellectual exercise that the author of this paper has performed.
Taking social and economic policies and mapping them onto fluid dynamics and theoretical physics is just...
It's a brilliant structural experiment.
Regardless of where you fall on the political spectrum.
Exactly.
We are here to impartially report on the content provided, nothing more.
It functions as a phenomenal thought experiment.
Whether you agree with the underlying political premises or not,
asking what does a macroeconomic policy actually look like if we map it as a mathematical topography.
It's just a powerful way to pressure test our baseline assumptions.
Okay, so to begin unpacking this, we really can't start with the math, can we?
No, the math won't make sense without the history.
Right.
We have to start where the paper starts, which is the historical groundwork laid out by Clara Mante.
Because to understand how the physics work, we first have to understand the post-World War I crisis of capitalism.
The immediate aftermath of the First World War really is the crucible for modern economic policy.
According to her research, everything we understand about modern austerity, the budget cuts, the interest rate hikes we debate today,
it all starts in that specific historical window.
Yeah, to set the scene properly, we have to look at the mindset before the war.
Before WWI, the private ownership of production, the gold standard, the mechanics of the free market,
these were largely accepted by the general public as just the natural order of the universe.
It was the water everyone swam in.
Exactly.
There wasn't a widespread mainstream questioning of whether the factory owner should own the factory.
It just was.
But during the war, something completely unprecedented happened across Europe.
Because of the war effort, right?
Out of sheer existential necessity to sustain the war effort, governments essentially suspended the free market.
Wait, they just paused capitalism?
Effectively, yes.
They took over massive sectors of the economy.
We are talking about the direct state management of coal mines, of railway networks, shipping, food production, distribution.
Because they couldn't afford the inefficiency.
It was wartime collectivization.
Precisely.
The government stepped in and effectively said,
we cannot rely on the chaotic, profit-driven free market to ensure we have enough coal and steel to fight this war.
We have to centrally organize it ourselves.
To ensure survival.
Right.
And they proved that alternative systems of mass organization could function.
And this had an unintended but profound psychological effect on the working class.
I bet.
They look at this massive wartime command economy and realize something highly dangerous to the established order.
Which was?
That private ownership of the means of production was not a natural, inescapable law of nature.
It was a political choice.
The logic was totally clear to them.
If the government could organize the railways and the factories to fight a brutal war,
why couldn't the workers organize those same railways and factories to benefit society and peacetime?
The illusion of inevitability was completely shattered.
Yes.
The paper calls this a moment where the perceived naturalness of capitalism fractured.
And it wasn't just like a philosophical awakening.
It led to massive, tangible movements on the ground.
People weren't just writing pamphlets.
They were taking action.
You had Lord di nuovo in Italy.
Right.
Which wasn't just a political party.
It was a movement of workers actively taking over factories in Turin and running them via worker councils.
And you had shop steward councils in Britain effectively bypassing traditional union leadership to control the shop floors directly.
They were literally showing, in real time, alternative ways to organize society and production without the traditional owners.
It was what Mattei identifies as a true crisis of the capital order.
Right.
And you have to put yourself in the shoes of the establishment at that moment.
The people who own the factories, the major creditors, the political elite.
They must have been terrified.
They were absolutely terrified.
The working class was realizing they didn't necessarily need the owners to make society function.
So, according to Mattei's historical analysis, they fought back.
A coalition of technocrats, economists, and political leaders, primarily in Britain and Italy, at first systematically invented a counteroffensive.
They recognized that they needed to restore the conditions of market dependence.
They needed to make the working class dependent on wage labor again to force them back into the traditional hierarchy.
And their weapon of choice, the tool they designed to accomplish this, is what Mattei terms the austerity trinity.
The austerity trinity.
Let's break that down piece by piece, because these are terms you still hear on the news literally every week today.
Fiscal, monetary, and industrial.
Let's start with fiscal austerity, as that's the one most people are familiar with.
This is what we typically think of when a politician talks about tightening our belts.
Cutting public standing.
Slashing budgets for health, education, housing, and welfare.
It's the aggressive rolling back of the state's provision of social goods.
Right.
And then the second pillar is monetary austerity.
Mm-hmm.
Which feels a bit more abstract to the average person, but hits just as hard.
It does.
Monetary austerity involves central banks intervening to raise interest rates and contract the money supply.
So it makes money harder to borrow.
It makes money harder to borrow.
It increases the cost of existing debt.
And it intentionally slows down economic activity.
And the third pillar?
Industrial austerity.
This is the direct, often aggressive suppression of wages, the dismantling of labor unions, and the rolling back of worker protections.
It's the effort to make labor cheaper and more pliable.
Now, normally, when politicians talk about austerity today, they use the language of a household budget.
We've maxed out the credit card.
Yeah.
They say, look, we've been spending too much.
We need to balance the books.
We need to eat our vegetables now so the economy can heal and grow later.
That's the standard line.
But, if I'm understanding the paper correctly, the historical context completely flips that narrative.
In this framing, austerity isn't about fixing a broken economy at all.
No.
And that's a crucial distinction.
If we connect this to the broader thesis of Flyxion's paper, austerity is framed here as a deliberate technology of class discipline.
A technology of discipline.
Wow.
It is not a necessary belt tightening to balance a spreadsheet.
It is a structural tool designed specifically to eliminate those alternatives that had opened up after the war.
Because if you cut social safety nets through fiscal austerity.
And make money scarce through monetary austerity.
And break union power through industrial austerity.
Mm.
You are forcing people back into a strict state of market dependence.
You have to sell your labor for a wage on the owner's terms.
Because the state has systematically removed any other way for you to survive.
I'm trying to picture this dynamically.
It's like...
Okay, imagine a group of people playing a game of Monopoly.
Okay, Monopoly.
For hours, they've been playing by the rules, paying rent, going bankrupt.
But suddenly, they realize they don't have to play this specific game.
They realize the rules are just printed on cardboard.
The money is just paper.
Right.
The post-war realization.
Exactly.
So they start building their own game in the corner of the room.
They're trading their own resources, maybe sharing the properties, having a great time.
And proving they don't actually need the banker to facilitate their interactions.
And the banker sees this.
Banker sees this.
They just panics at losing their authority.
And instead of trying to convince them to come back, they just walk over to the thermostat,
turn the heat off in the dead of winter, confiscate all the snacks in the house, and lock the front door.
That's a fascinating way to visualize it.
The banker changes the environmental conditions of the room.
Right.
The banker creates a harsh, artificial winter in the house.
And they do it so that the players eventually get so cold and so hungry that they have to come back to the Monopoly board,
sit down, and beg for a few of those colorful $500 bills, just so they can buy a blanket and a sandwich to survive.
It's an incredibly apt analogy for the thesis Matai presents.
The banker isn't confiscating the snacks because the house is genuinely out of food,
or because they need to balance the household budget.
They're doing it to force participation.
Yes.
Austerity, in this view, is the locking of the doors.
It is the artificial winter.
It forces you to rely on the banker's currency.
And this is exactly where Flyxion's paper takes a massive leap from pure history into something completely different.
The physics.
Yes.
Because Flyxion reads Matai's history of this locking of the doors and asks a wild question.
What does this actually look like if we map it using actual theoretical physics?
How do you mathematically represent the confiscation of the snacks and the freezing of the room?
Exactly.
How do you formalize the geometry of class discipline?
If this isn't just an abstract political concept, but a structural reality we live in, we should be able to map its topography.
And this brings us to the first major scientific framework introduced in the text, the Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum, or RSVP.
Okay, RSVP, Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum.
Let's take this slow, because I want to make sure you, the listener, can really visualize this alongside me.
First of all, I need to know what a plenum is.
I hear that word, and I think of the space above a drop ceiling in an office building.
That's the HVAC plenum.
In physics, the concept of a plenum is essentially a space that is completely filled with matter or a field.
It is the fundamental opposite of a vacuum.
Okay, so no empty space.
Right. In a vacuum, things can move without interacting with anything else.
In a plenum, every single point in space has properties, and what happens in one area necessarily pushes against and affects the other areas.
It's a continuous, interconnected medium.
So in this model, the social plenum is the entirety of our society and economy.
We're all suspended in it together.
Exactly.
Now, within this RSVP framework, Flyxion introduces three main variables that we need to define.
The first one is represented by the Greek letter phi.
Phi. Okay.
The scalar potential.
If I recall my high school physics, a scalar is just a magnitude, right?
Like temperature.
You've got it.
A scalar field maps a single value to every point in a space.
In this specific model, the scalar potential, FIA, represents the landscape of resource accessibility and decision-making power at any given point in society.
So how should we picture that?
I find it easiest to think of it as a topographic map, like you'd use for hiking.
The high points on this mathematical map, the peaks, represent a massive concentration of wealth, institutional power, and ownership.
And the valleys.
The low points, the valleys, represent extreme scarcity and lack of agency.
Okay, so if you are standing on a high peak of phi, you are a CEO or a major shareholder or a central banker, you have massive access to resources and the power to make decisions that affect the whole map.
And if you are stuck down in a deep valley, you are a gig worker struggling to make rent.
You have very little access to resources.
That makes perfect sense.
That's the topography.
Now what's the second variable?
The second variable interacts directly with that landscape.
It's the vector flow, represented by a lowercase v.
And a vector, unlike a scalar, has both magnitude and direction.
Yes.
In the social planet, this vector flow represents the directed flow of human effort, attention, and economic agency.
It is what people are actually doing.
Like waking up and going to work.
It is you getting up in the morning, commuting to work, producing value, spending money at the grocery store.
It is the literal movement of human energy across that scalar landscape.
Wait, let me make sure I'm connecting these right.
In physics, if you have a topographic landscape, gravity dictates that water will naturally flow down the topography.
Are you saying that in this model, human effort flows according to the shape of the scalar potential landscape?
Precisely.
The shape of the landscape dictates the movement of the people on it.
Energy naturally moves down gradients.
Wow.
Okay, and that brings us to the third variable.
Which adds a crucial layer of complexity.
The entropy field, represented by S.
Now, we have to be careful here because in standard thermodynamics, entropy is often colloquially thought of as just chaos or disorder.
Right, like a messy bedroom.
Exactly.
But in information theory, and in this specific RSVP model, entropy is a measure of the degree of available variation.
It represents the possibility space in a society.
Meaning how many different choices you actually have.
Exactly.
High entropy means there are many viable different ways for a system to exist.
For an individual, it means there are many viable ways to live, to organize, to sustain yourself outside of a single rigid path.
And low entropy.
Low entropy means the system is highly constrained.
There's really only one way things can be arranged.
Let me make sure I have this triad locked in my head.
Phi is the landscape of resources, the mountains and valleys.
Yeah.
V is how human effort actually moves across that landscape.
And S is how many different choices or paths you actually have while you are moving.
That is a perfect summary.
So the big question is, how does Flyxian take Maddy's historical concept of market dependence and map it onto these three physics variables?
This is where the synthesis becomes incredibly elegant.
Maddy argues that the capital order rests entirely on private ownership and the enforcement of market dependence.
In the RSVP model, private ownership is represented as a massive concentration of the scalar potential, phi, at the very top peaks.
Okay, but you said austerity doesn't really operate on the peaks.
Right.
Austerity operates on the bottom of the landscape.
Austerity artificially lowers what the paper calls the subsistence potential.
It drops the floor of phi.
Hold on, let me visualize that.
Yeah.
So when a government enacts fiscal austerity slashing welfare programs, cutting public health care, defunding social housing, they aren't just saving money.
Mathematically, in this space, they are violently dropping the floor of the landscape out from under millions of people.
Yes.
They're creating a precipitous drop, an artificially steep gradient in the landscape.
And remember how we established that human effort, the vector flow V, must flow down gradients.
Because fiscal austerity creates this massive steep drop-off, it forcefully channels all human effort toward one highly specific attractor at the bottom, wage labor.
You can't just live off the land anymore because of enclosure.
And you can't rely on a robust social safety net because of fiscal cuts.
So your energy is violently and predictably pulled toward the only available source of survival, which is selling your labor to the people who control the high points of phi.
That's exactly the geometry of it.
Okay, I think I'm really starting to see the geometry here, but I need to play with the metaphor a bit.
Are we talking about something like a literal gravity, well, actually no, let's go back to an arcade.
If I picture the economy as a pinball machine, is fiscal austerity, basically walking up to the machine and jacking up the back legs so the table is tilted at a brutal, incredibly steep angle.
I love that analogy.
Yes, jacking up the back legs is exactly what dropping the subsistence floor does.
It increases the tilt of the entire social field.
So if the table is tilted that steeply, it almost doesn't matter how you hit the ball.
The ball, which in this case is our human effort, our daily labor, the vector flow V, is going to roll incredibly fast and inevitably right down the middle, straight toward the flippers.
And the flippers are controlled by the employers.
Right. You have absolutely no time to bounce around the bumpers or hang out in the upper corners exploring the top of the board.
The gravity of the tilted table just rips you down to wage labor instantly.
And that tilt is reinforced and accelerated by the other elements of the austerity trinity we discussed.
Remember, monetary austerity, the central banks raising interest rates and contracting the money supply.
How does that fit in?
In the RSVP model, this intervention increases what is called the dissipative coefficient, which is represented by the Greek letter new.
Dissipative coefficient. My brain immediately translates that to friction. Am I off base there?
You are exactly on base. It is friction.
Monetary austerity adds massive systemic friction to the daily lives of workers and small businesses.
Because things cost more.
Yes. When interest rates spike, your credit card debt gets much more expensive to carry.
Your mortgage rates go up, making housing precarious.
Your car alone is harder to pay off.
Your effort, your vector flow dissipates rapidly, just trying to stand still.
You lose energy to the system.
Meanwhile, the major creditors, the people who actually own the debt at the top of the FI landscape,
are completely insulated from this friction. In fact, they profit from it.
And what about the third pillar? Industrial austerity, crushing the unions, lowering wages, removing worker protections.
How does that fit into the pinball machine?
The paper models industrial austerity as restricting the boundary conditions on collective agency.
It prevents the vector flows from aggregating.
So in the pinball analogy, it essentially puts up harsh walls or removes certain bumpers on the machine
so the balls can't group together or get stuck in a safe zone.
Exactly. They isolate the flows.
So you are physically isolating the vector flow, adding exhausting friction to its movement through debt,
and tilting the entire landscape so fiercely that arriving at wage labor is the only mathematically viable destination.
It's engineered inevitability.
Engineered inevitability is the perfect phrase.
But wait, if we look back at the history, the post-WWI era,
people were exploring other destinations, right?
The worker councils in Italy and Britain, they were hanging around the top of the pinball machine.
They were.
How did they manage that?
And how does the model explain the disappearance of those alternatives?
I think this brings us back to that third variable, the entropy field,
and what I want to call the illusion of choice.
This is perhaps the most profound theoretical shift in the paper,
how affliction redefines entropy for political economy.
As we touched on, in this model, high entropy means a high effective dimensionality of the social possibility space.
Let's unpack that phrase, high effective dimensionality, meaning the space isn't just a flat line.
There are multiple directions you can move.
There are many viable states the system can exist in simultaneously.
Exactly.
The post-WWI era, with its worker councils, cooperative logistics, and state-managed production,
was a period of extremely high entropy.
The numbing story of capitalist inevitability had temporarily broken down.
People were actively populating regions of the social plenum that were previously considered utterly inaccessible.
The dimensionality of society expanded.
There were suddenly many valid ways to organize production and sustain life.
So, if high entropy means lots of choices and viable alternatives,
then the technocrats who wanted to restore the capital order,
the ones who wanted to lock everyone back into wage labor,
they couldn't just attack the workers directly.
They had to attack the entropy field itself.
Precisely.
The author argues that austerity is fundamentally an entropic dampener.
An entropic dampener.
The overarching goal of the technocrats that Methe documents was to collapse that expanded,
multidimensional possibility space back into a singular, low-entropy configuration.
They needed to reduce the system down to one viable state,
wage labor under private ownership.
But how do you actually do that in a society that nominally calls itself a democracy?
If you just come out on a podium and say,
hey, everyone, we are actively eliminating your choices and forcing you to work for the factory owners,
people will riot.
We've seen it happen.
Oh, absolutely.
How do you dampen entropy without it looking like naked tyranny?
They do it through the creation and deployment of the ideology of pure economics.
Pure economics.
Yes.
They systematically insulate economic decision-making from democratic participation.
They create central banks.
They establish international credit bodies.
They staff them with credentialed, unelected experts.
And they claim that the policies these bodies enact are just neutral, objective science.
Oh, I see.
In RSVP terms, they use the language of pure economics as a representational technology.
They frame the wage labor configuration not as a brutal political choice,
but as the unique natural equilibrium of the system.
So they walk up to the pinball machine.
They crank the back legs up to a 45-degree angle.
And then when the players complain that the ball is plummeting straight down into the gutter,
the technocrats point at the board and say,
look, it's just gravity.
It's nature.
It's the law of physics.
We'd love to help you, but there's nothing we can do to fight gravity.
That's a brilliant way to frame it.
They naturalize the political stabilization of the field.
Formally, the paper states that this operation reduces the entropy gradient available to the
working class regions and drastically increases the curvature around the wage labor attractor.
Meaning it's physically harder to escape.
They engineer the space so that making local departures from wage labor,
trying to start a cooperative, or attempting to live off the grid,
becomes energetically costly and globally unstable.
I want to pause here and talk about unemployment in the context of this model.
Yeah.
Because this specific section of the paper completely blew my mind.
Usually, we are told by politicians and economists that unemployment is a tragic side effect of a struggling economy.
A bug in the system.
Exactly.
It's a bug we're always trying to fix.
But Flyxion, building directly on Maddy's historical analysis,
says unemployment is not an accident at all.
It is a vital instrument.
Yes, and this is a sobering realization.
In this field theoretic model, unemployment functions as a high gradient region in the scalar potential phi.
It acts as a necessary restoring force.
Like a spring.
Think of a mechanical spring.
If you pull a spring away from its natural resting position,
the restoring force builds up and eventually snaps it back.
When workers are displaced, or when they try to demand higher wages and are fired,
the sheer terror and absolute material deprivation of unemployment acts as that restoring force.
It pushes them, often violently, right back into the wage-labor attractor.
It is the threat of the abyss that keeps the whole system in a low-entropy state.
If you don't accept the terms of wage-labor, you fall into the void.
And for that threat to work, the void has to exist.
And it has to be legitimately terrifying.
It can't be comfortable.
It forces market dependence by making the alternative quite literally lethal,
or at least socially and materially devastating.
I want to take a second and address you, the listener, directly.
Because you might be wondering, why should I care about this math?
Why go through the mental effort of mapping century-old history
onto scalar potentials and entropy gradients?
They can feel very abstract.
Right.
But I will tell you why it resonated so deeply with me when I read it.
Because it completely changes how we view the concept of inevitability.
When you watch the news tomorrow, and a sharply-dressed pundit says,
well, the central bank unfortunately has to raise unemployment to cool inflation.
It's just basic economics.
It can feel so disempowering.
It makes you feel tiny.
Yes.
But this framework suggests the opposite.
It is incredibly liberating to realize that pure economics might just be a representational technology.
It is a language deliberately designed to make a brutal political choice look like an unchangeable law of thermodynamics.
It is not gravity.
It is just a tilted table.
It is a profound paradigm shift.
When you strip away the language of inevitability, you reveal the architecture of power.
But as Flyxion is careful to point out, recognizing that the table is tilted doesn't automatically untilt it.
Right.
Because the system isn't just maintained by ideology.
It's maintained by institutional memory.
Once these political choices are made, they are locked into the system in a very specific, incredibly stubborn way.
And this realization transitions the paper into its second major analytical framework, SpherePop.
Right.
So we've mapped the physics, the RSVP model of how energy flows.
Now the paper shifts gears entirely into computer science and topology.
SpherePop, I'm going to need you to hold my hand on this one.
What exactly is this?
SpherePop is a highly theoretical framework that models computation as an irreversible calculus of events.
Irreversible calculus.
Okay.
To understand why this is useful for understanding society, we have to contrast it with how we usually think about math or classical physics or even daily life where things are often reversible.
Give me an example.
If a ball rolls down a hill, you can apply kinetic force and push it back up the hill.
In basic arithmetic, if you have an equation like 10 plus 5 equals 15, you can simply subtract 5 to get back to your starting point of 10.
There is a fundamental symmetry.
It's the undo button.
If I'm typing a document and I delete a paragraph by mistake, I just hit control Z, the mistake is gone, and the system returns exactly to its previous state.
Exactly.
That is a reversible system.
But SpherePop represents an append-only system.
Append-only.
It models environments where the past is structurally determinative of the present and where time only flows in one direction, leaving permanent scars.
In an append-only system, every time a significant event happens, it is committed to an immutable history.
You cannot overwrite it.
You cannot hit control Z.
And more importantly for our purposes, each new event creates a new topological scope.
What the author calls a bubble that permanently restricts what can be done inside it moving forward.
Okay.
An append-only ledger.
The most common example people might know today is a blockchain.
Right.
It's a great example.
Or, to use a simpler metaphor, a diary written in permanent ink.
You can always turn the page and write something new today, but you can never, ever erase what was written on the pages before.
Every new rule or event is permanently stacked on top of the old rules.
That's a very solid grounding for the concept.
Now, Flyxion argues that this append-only architecture is exactly how austerity operates historically.
Think about the massive, sweeping institutional changes Mate documents in her books.
Like privatizations.
Yes, when a government privatizes a massive public utility like water or rail or energy, or when Italy, under fascism, formally criminalized labor strikes in 1926.
Or when Britain made the disastrous decision to return to the gold standard in 1925.
Exactly.
These were not just minor policy tweaks that the next administration could easily flip back with a quick vote.
Because doing those things changes the fundamental shape of the reality that follows them.
They were what the paper calls scope-defining events.
They completely restructured the very space in which all future politics could happen.
If you privatize the national water supply, you don't just change who gets the bill.
You actively dissolve the institutional knowledge of how to run it publicly.
You rewrite the legal grammar of property rights.
You create a brand new bubble.
And now everyone living inside that bubble has to play by the rules of privatized water.
Even if a new government is elected, they find themselves trapped inside the logic of the previous event.
So the grammar of the bubble is defined by the committed configuration of the past.
And this leads us to one of the most powerful and explanatory concepts in the entire paper.
The structure of nested scopes.
Nested scopes, yes.
When I read this, I pictured those Russian nesting dolls.
You open the big one, there's a smaller one inside, and so on.
Let's try to draw this geometry for the listener.
In our modern economic system, who is sitting in the innermost smallest but most powerful bubble.
The innermost scopes are occupied by the technocratic institutions.
The central banks.
The central banks, like the Federal Reserve or the ECB, the international financial bodies like the IMF or the World Bank, the unelected bodies of credentialed macroeconomic experts.
According to both Maddy's history and Flyxion's topology, modern austerity relies heavily on delegating ultimate economic authority to these specific institutions.
And they sit in the innermost, most consequential bubbles of the sphere pop architecture, largely shielded from public pressure.
Exactly.
And where are we?
Where is the general public, the voters, the people actually experiencing the economy?
We are operating in the outer bubbles.
The vibrant noise of democratic life, the elections, the legislative debates, the social movements, the protests, all of this takes place in the outer scopes.
And crucially, those outer scopes are entirely nested inside the technocratic scope.
Yes.
Wait, I really need to make sure I graph the implications of that.
Are you saying that even if we, the public, vote overwhelmingly for a policy in the outer bubble, let's say we vote for a massive green energy transition or universal health care, if the rules of the inner bubble say inflation must be controlled at all costs and deficit spending is forbidden, the inner rule overrides our vote.
Yes.
And we can't touch that inner rule.
That is the defining structural feature of nested scopes in the sphere pop framework.
In computational logic, the operations of the inner bubble are invisible to and cannot be overwritten by the outer bubbles.
Wow.
The grammar of the inner scope rigorously dictates the boundaries of what is possible in the outer scope, the baseline assumptions that sovereign debt must always be serviced first, that the money supply is a purely technical variable immune to public input, that certain levels of unemployment are natural, that grammar is locked tight in the inner bubble.
This reminds me so intensely of managing software, or playing a video game, the voters, the citizens, we are essentially just the end users of an app.
We are tapping buttons on our screens, swiping left and right, thinking we're making profound choices.
We can choose to engage dark mode or light mode.
We can elect a new avatar, we can rearrange the icons.
Yeah.
But the technocrats in the central banks, they hold the root administrative passwords.
They are modifying the actual base code of the operating system.
We can vote all we want in the user interface, but if the root admin hardcodes a rule at the OS level that says wage labor is mandatory for survival, there is absolutely no button we can click on our screen to change that.
We don't have admin privileges.
That is wild.
It is a deeply resonant way to conceptualize it.
The pervasive ideology of pure economics is essentially the root admins presenting the specific grammar of their code as if it were the immutable structure of reality itself.
They tell the users, look, the app just works this way, it's the laws of physics, when in historical fact, it was deliberately coded that way in 1925 or 1979 and locked into an append-only ledger.
Okay, but this raises a huge mechanical question for me.
If this append-only system is logged in and the root admins are safe in their inner bubble, how exactly does this inner bubble enforce its rules on the rest of the fluid room, the social plenum we talked about in the RSV2 model?
Ah, how the code controls the physics.
Exactly.
How does the computational code actually control the physical flow of human effort?
How do they force us to obey?
And I believe this brings us to the most math-heavy part of the paper, where we have to dive into the math of class rigidity.
Yes.
This is where fliction pulls off a massive intellectual synthesis, bringing the fluid dynamics of the RSVP model and the computational architecture of SpherePOP together into a unified set of equations.
Now, I know we promised not to drown the listener in raw math, so we will keep this highly conceptual.
We will.
But the entire mechanism relies on a foundational principle called the incompressibility condition.
Okay, I'm ready.
Lay the concept on me.
What does it mean for a society to be incompressible?
Let's start with physical fluid dynamics.
If a fluid is incompressible, like water, it means its overall volume is strictly preserved, regardless of the pressure applied to it.
You cannot squeeze a gallon of water into a half-gallon jug.
If you push down on water in one area, it doesn't just disappear or compress into nothing.
It must mathematically expand and displace fluid somewhere else.
Okay, that makes sense physically. How does it apply to the social plenum?
In Flyxion's model, the incompressibility condition encodes the structural rigidity of class relations under the regime of austerity.
It means the economic system is a closed loop.
So it means the economy is essentially a zero-sum game geometrically.
In terms of this specific topography, yes.
Resources, wealth, and agency that flow away from one region of the plenum must mathematically appear in another region.
The gains realized in one sector are structurally, inextricably tied to losses in another.
You cannot just magically generate resource accessibility for the working class without it directly pulling from the massive concentration to fill you at the top.
The system is closed under redistribution.
It resists changes to its overall volume of inequality.
To explain how this closed system actively fights back against attempts to change it,
the paper breaks down that scalar potential, the landscape fee, into three different interacting parts.
And I know the equation looks like a nightmare of Greek letters, but let's take them one by one conceptually.
The first part is the pressure constraint.
Yes, the pressure constraint. What does that do?
The pressure constraints dictate how the system handles local changes.
Let's imagine a scenario.
A local community, maybe a progressive city, decides to implement a strong democratic redistributive policy.
They raise local taxes on corporations to fund robust public housing.
They are attempting to alter the flow of resources locally to raise that subsistence floor.
But because the entire system is incompressible, this local action instantly induces a global system-wide corrective response mediated by the pressure field.
So it's like if workers push down and try to claim space over here, the system instantly reacts somewhere else to balance it out and negate their progress.
Exactly.
Like capital flight.
If a city raises taxes, the corporations just move their headquarters across the border, instantly nullifying the local gain.
Capital flight is a perfect real-world example of this pressure response.
The correction propagates across the entire domain almost instantly.
But crucially, it is not a neutral correction.
The system doesn't just try to find a fair balance.
And this brings us to the most complex but most important term in the decomposition, the non-local boundary contribution.
The boundary.
When I picture the planem as a room filled with fluid, the boundary is the walls of the room, right?
The institutional surface of the capital order.
Correct.
But these walls aren't inert.
This boundary actively generates a signal, which is governed by what the paper calls a boundary memory function.
Boundary memory function.
Yeah.
Do know by Q of T.
Yes, Q of T.
This function continuously aggregates all the past institutional events we talked about in the SpherePop section.
The historical financial regulations, the anti-union labor laws, the massive privatizations.
All those append-only historical events are stored on the boundary of the society.
And they generate a continuous restrictive signal that is injected back into the interior of the system.
So the boundaries of our society aren't just passive containers holding us in.
They are active transmitters, constantly beaming historical instructions back into the room.
They are telling the fluid how it is allowed to move.
What's deeply fascinating here is that this boundary memory depends on the historical momentum of policy.
Past boundary activity decisions made decades ago by central bankers or technocrats is continuously reintroduced into the present dynamics.
Wait, I think this just clicked for me.
This boundary memory function.
Does this explain a paradox that drives me crazy?
Which paradox?
You always hear on the news, after a round of harsh budget cuts or structural adjustment programs in developing nations,
commentators saying austerity failed again.
It didn't create the economic growth it promised.
But despite constantly failing to create growth, the politicians keep prescribing it.
Does this math explain why they keep doing it?
Yes.
It absolutely answers that paradox.
The paper argues that austerity persists even when it demonstrably fails to create economic growth because it is not supposed to create growth.
That is a fundamental misreading of its actual purpose.
Its purpose is to act as a boundary signal designed to maintain the capital order and enforce market dependence.
The failure of its stated public justification, like reducing national debt or spurring innovation,
does not diminish the strength of the boundary signal.
Because the signal is what matters.
Right.
The institutional structures, like central bank independence and international debt obligations,
continue to inject restrictive terms into the landscape regardless of the human or economic outcome.
It is functioning exactly as designed.
Okay, I want to try and translate this intense math back into a physical visual analogy for the listener.
Because the system is incompressible, and because of this boundary signal,
it feels like the economy is a giant waterbed.
A waterbed.
Let's explore that.
The working class is lying on one side of the waterbed,
and capital, the owners, the creditors, are lying on the other.
If the workers organize, push down, and try to claim some space or enact a local policy to gain resources,
the waterbed, being incompressible, instantly forces a bulge on the capital side.
Yes, that's the pressure constraint.
But the boundary memory, those historical institutional rules,
acts like a set of heavy, rigid ratchet straps tightened entirely around the outside of the waterbed
by the technocrats in the inner bubble.
Strapping the whole thing down.
Right.
When the workers push, the straps detect the pressure, tighten automatically,
and force the water to flow right back to the wage-labor attractor.
The system is rigged geometrically.
The boundary continuously speaks into the present landscape,
actively squashing any deviation from the norm.
I think that waterbed analogy captures the mechanics perfectly.
It shows why reform is so difficult.
Class rigidity emerges not just because police physically enforce property laws on the street,
but as a structural mathematical consequence of non-local constraint propagation.
The geometry of the system itself, bound by those historical straps,
violently resists any departure from the low-entropy wage-labor attractor.
Oh, exactly.
Okay.
I'm going to take a deep breath because this is heavy.
We have a tilted pinball machine pulling our energy into wage labor.
We have nested bubbles where we are permanently locked out of the admin privileges of our own society.
We have a strapped-down waterbed that mathematically enforces class discipline
based on 100 years of append-only historical rules that we didn't write.
It's a lot.
It feels incredibly bleak.
It feels entirely inescapable.
But the title of Maddy's 2026 book is Escape from Capitalism.
And Flyxion concludes this dense paper with a section entirely dedicated to the mechanics of escape.
The paper doesn't just diagnose the problem.
So, if history is an append-only ledger and the geometry is rigged against us,
how do they suggest we actually get out?
This brings us to section 6 of the paper, the mechanics of escape.
And the first thing to understand is a major shift in how we think about social change.
Escape, in this rigorous mathematical model, is not modeled as a single, violent, revolutionary explosion
that magically shatters the system overnight.
Okay, so it's not storing the castle.
It is defined formally as a topological re-democratization.
It requires a deliberate structural expansion of the phase space.
Topological expansion, meaning we don't just try to win the rigged game.
We have to fundamentally change the shape of the rules.
We have to change the geometry of the board.
Exactly.
You can't just push harder on the waterbed.
You have to cut the straps.
The paper outlines three specific mathematical requirements for this escape to occur,
directly mapping Maddy's political interventions onto the field geometry we've discussed.
The first requirement is to make that boundary memory signal democratically responsive.
But how do we actually do that?
If the boundary is currently controlled by the inner bubble of technocrats,
and they are insulated from our votes,
how do we democratize a boundary we can't touch?
We have to force open the technocratic boundaries to the interior plenum.
In the computational terms of sphere pop,
we have to insert new, massive events into the append-only history
that alter the fundamental grammar of the outer scope.
Wait, like what?
We have to make the operational rules of the central banks,
the credit rating bodies, the sovereign debt servicers,
completely visible and legally revisable by the public.
We have to shatter the insulation of pure economics.
We have to demand admin access.
So you have to drag the root code out of the server room
and into the user interface so we can actually vote on it.
We have to politicize the central bank.
That is requirement one.
Break the insulation.
What is the second requirement?
The second requirement focuses on expanding the entropy field we talked about earlier.
Mathematically, this is modeled by increasing what the paper calls logistic variation.
Okay, no raw equations.
Well, walk me through the concept of logistic variation.
What does it look like on the ground?
It relates to an individual's position relative to complete market dependence.
Imagine a scale from zero to one.
If you are pushed to the extreme boundary values,
meaning you are at zero,
having absolutely nothing and completely dependent on wage labor to survive,
or you are at one, completely saturating the resources,
the mathematical variation collapses.
There is no entropy.
There is no choice.
Austerity operates by continually driving the working class down to that extreme boundary
of complete exclusion,
driving them toward zero.
You either have absolutely nothing
and must accept whatever grueling labor terms are offered,
or you own everything.
There is no middle ground.
There is no breathing room.
Right, but mathematical variation reaches its absolute maximum
when you are exactly in the middle of that scale.
That is the point of greatest internal variation and freedom.
So to expand the entropy field in reality,
we must enact policies that aggressively raise the subsistence floor.
We are talking about implementing universal basic income,
building robust public housing that isn't tied to employment,
guaranteeing free health care and education.
We have to pull people away from the extreme boundary of zero
so they aren't forced into the wage labor pinball flippers just to survive.
We must maximize the variation in how people can safely choose to live.
We untilt the pinball machine.
We make the landscape flatter.
So the vector flow of human effort can comfortably explore the whole board,
finding new ways to collaborate and create,
rather than just plummeting in a state of terror into the wage labor flippers.
Yes.
Raising the floor creates the space for alternative economies to breathe.
And that leads to the third and final mathematical requirement,
weakening the coupling between the boundary and the interior.
What does coupling mean in this context?
It refers to how strongly the institutional memory those boundary signals
forces its will onto the present landscape.
Currently, the coupling is incredibly strong.
The boundary constantly beams the message,
enforce wage labor, protect creditors at all costs,
punish inflation with unemployment.
We must weaken or redistribute this coupling
so that the institutions amplify high-entropy signals rather than low-entropy ones.
So instead of the central bank having a mandate that says,
crush labor power to stabilize prices,
the institutional boundary should encode rules that prioritize diverse, democratic, human-centric configurations.
The institutions must be fundamentally reprogrammed to protect possibility rather than enforce discipline.
We change the signal from comply to explore.
Precisely. You alter the transmission.
You know, when I try to synthesize all of this,
what really strikes me is how hopeful it actually is beneath all the dense math.
I always thought of economic emancipation as this utopian pie-in-the-sky dream
that required everyone to magically become better people.
It often feels that way.
But in this framework, emancipation isn't magic.
It is literally just expanding the phase space of what is mathematically possible.
It's giving people room to breathe and make choices beyond mere survival.
It is just changing the geometry of our social reality.
That is the core takeaway of Flyxion's synthesis of Matei.
The potential landscape of our society is not fixed by nature.
It is actively maintained by the continuous injection of constructed boundary signals.
If we change what the boundary encodes, we change the physical landscape.
Making the invisible geometry of the capital order visible
is the first necessary step toward altering it.
You cannot hack a system if you don't know the architecture of its code.
Yeah, to map it first.
And that brings us to the end of an absolutely incredible journey today.
Let's do a quick flyover of where we've been.
We started with Clara Matei's historical critique of austerity,
the terrifying realization after World War I
that alternative ways of living were actually possible,
and the deliberate technocratic backlash to invent austerity
to shut those alternatives down.
We then ran that history through physical fluid dynamics,
using the RISBP model to show how fiscal, monetary, and industrial policies
tilt the landscape of power, add friction to our daily lives,
and weaponize unemployment as a gravitational restoring force to trap us in wage labor.
We layered on the computer science of SpherePop
to see how our history is an append-only ledger,
where technocrats sit in protected inner bubbles
dictating the grammar of our democratic lives.
And finally, we looked at the incompressible math of class rigidity,
realizing that our economy is a zero-sum waterbed
strapped down by historical memory,
but the topological escape is actually possible
if we demand admin access to the boundary rules
and aggressively raise the floor of human survival.
It is a profound realization that the natural laws of economics
are actually rigid, constructed geometries
designed entirely to limit our choices.
For you, the listener, the goal today was to give you an aha moment,
to give you a new lens to view the world,
and I hope we delivered.
Because the next time you read the news,
the next time you see a headline about interest rate hikes
or budget cuts or inflation targets,
I don't think you will see them as just math or weather anymore.
You will see them as topological boundary signals.
You will see the root admins tweaking the code.
You will see them actively shaping the literal terrain
you have to walk on tomorrow morning.
Once you see the geometry of the system,
you really cannot unsee it.
Which leaves us with a final thought to take with you
as you go about your day.
We open this deep dive by talking about the feeling
that the economy is a game with invisible rules.
We've mapped those rules on a macro societal scale today,
but I want you to apply it to the micro scale of your own life.
To the personal geometry.
Yes.
If the economy is an invisible landscape
built by historical boundary events,
what is the geometry of your own daily routine?
When you wake up, commute, work, and spend,
are you moving freely through a high entropy space of possibility?
Or are you just a vector flow, a pinball,
rolling down a steep, low entropy gradient
designed by someone else's rules?
Keep questioning the shape of the world around you.
We will catch you on the next deep dive.
Let's do creeds.
Let's do it.
We will catch you on the next level yet.
Let'sıl move on to the left.
!
Let's do it.
That's something.